In this video, we're going to
introduce Macros for making
visualizations both
interactive and
automated. What is a macro?
Macro is a small program that can
automate repetitive
or difficult tasks.
They can be coded from scratch.
But Excel comes with
built-in macro recorder,
where you can record
yourself going through
certain steps and then
just play it back.
That's the approach
we're going to take.
Now what Ran wants to do is add
one last conditional
format to the spreadsheet.
But he wants to be able to
select a state or
territory by clicking
in the map and then have
the core waste data for
that territory highlight.
So let's start by doing
the conditional format.
This is a bit different
because we adding
a conditional format
to an entire row.
So we're going to select
our data and come up to
Conditional Formatting and
we're going to need to come
to New Rule because we
need a formula for this.
Then we're going to click
in the bar where we enter
our formula and we're
going to type out equals.
We're going to check
if our states.
We're going to click
on the first state
and we want to see
if that's equal
to K1 but you'll notice it's
put those dollars on again.
Now last time we split this
over to a relative reference,
but this time we need to
do something different.
As it goes down
evaluating the states,
we do want it to change
but as it goes across,
we need it to keep
referring back to column B.
So we're going to press
our F4 function key
twice so we still have the
dollar in front of the B.
We're then going to type equals
and check if it's equal to K1.
Now we need to add a format.
So let's just make
it blue and will
change our font color to white.
We're then going to
say "Okay" and "Okay".
ACTs data is highlighting.
If I come to K1 and change that
to Northern Territories,
that's working.
But you'll notice that
the new format is
actually covering
up the bottom five.
Now we can change this.
So if we click into our data,
come back to
Conditional Formatting
and come to Manage Rules.
From here, you can delete
or edit existing rules.
As we add new ones,
they're added to the top of
the list and these are given
priority over rules
low in the list,
but we can change the sequence.
So I'm going to
click on "Bottom 5",
move it up, say
"Okay" and we can now
see our Bottom 5 rule.
So that was a conditional
formatting taken care of.
Now how do we link up our
map to our dropdown list?
What we're going to
do is we're going to
record a simple macro
where we record ourselves
typing the value ACT into K1.
You then have the option to link
any graphical object to a macro.
So we're going to take
the shape covering
the ACT region and
we're going to hook that
up to our ACT macro.
Before we can record
the macro though,
there are two important
things we need to do.
The first one is
save our workbook as
a macro-enabled workbook because
normal Excel spreadsheets
do not support macros.
So we're going to come to File.
We're going to click "Save As".
We're going to change this
from an Excel workbook to
an Excel macro-enabled workbook
and we're going to click "Save".
The second thing we have to do is
show our Developer
tab in the ribbon.
It doesn't show by default.
So if you haven't used it before,
come to your File tab,
come down to Options,
come to Customize Ribbon
and put a tick next to Developer.
Then just say, "Okay".
The Developer tab should now
appear and we're going
to click on that.
The first group in
the Developer tab is
called the code group.
This gives us all the tools
we need for recording,
editing, and running macros.
Before we hit the
"Record" button though,
we just going to make sure
that we clicked away from
K1 because the first
thing we want to
record ourselves doing
is clicking onto K1.
So do that and then
click "Record Macro".
Now we have to give our macro
a name that's unique
within the workbook.
I'm going to call it ACT
and then you have the option of
giving it a keyboard shortcut,
but Control + A, in fact,
Control A through Z are
already accounted for.
So if you hold your
"Shift" key down,
you can use the keyboard
shortcut Control + Shift + A.
We're then going to say "Okay".
Now anything we do is
going to be recorded.
We're going to start
by clicking into K1.
We're going to type ACT.
Don't use the drop-down.
Then click to wherever you want
the active cell to be when
the macro finishes running.
So I'm going to click on B4.
Now really important, you
must stop the recording.
Let's do another one. So I'm
going to click "Record Macro".
This time I'm going
to call it NSW.
I'm going to make my
keyboard shortcut
Control + Shift + M.
Just hold the Shift not
the Control and say,
"Okay", and now
I'm going to click
into K1 and I'm
going to type NSW.
Again, click away and
press "Stop Recording".
Let's test if those
macros are working.
So we're going to press
Control + Shift + A.
Yeah, that worked beautifully
and now Control +
Shift + N. Fantastic.
So really easy to create
a recorded macro.
Be quite good to see what
these macros look like.
So we're going to come up to
our code group and click
on the "Macros" button.
This dialogue will
allow you to run
the macro if you don't
have a keyboard shortcut.
You can delete it if you've
made a mistake and just start
again or you can edit the macro.
We're going to click "Edit".
Welcome to the VBA editor.
The code we're looking at is
Visual Basic for applications.
This is code that our macros
are written in in Excel.
At first glance, it might
look a little foreign,
but we're just going to take
a moment to break it down.
All recorded macros
begin with the word
Sub and end with End Sub.
Make sure any code you
want to run appears
between those two and that
you don't delete them.
The stuff in green is
what we call a comment.
It's going to be ignored
by the compiler,
so it's not actually
going to run.
But it's useful for giving
information about the macro,
like who wrote it or
when it was changed.
If I wanted to remove
a line of code,
I could just put an apostrophe
and you'll see that comments it
out and if I remove the
apostrophe, it's back.
Getting into the code
itself, Range ("K1").
Select. Well, we can work
out what that's doing,
it's selecting the cell K1.
We're then changing the value
in the active cell to be ACT.
Then we're selecting before.
Not easy to write from scratch,
but very easy to understand
and very easy to change.
So rather than going and
recording my other six macros,
I can just copy paste
this and edit it.
I'm going to select the data,
the macro for New South Wales,
Control + C. Click underneath
the end sub and paste.
Now all I need to do is replace
all the NSW with another state.
So I'm going to go for
Western Australia.
Don't have the
keyboard shortcuts,
so I'll remove that.
Then very important,
make sure that
the active cell is changed to WA.
Now to get back into our
workbook to check this,
you could close this window
or great keyboard shortcut,
Alt + F11, toggles you
between the spreadsheet
and your code.
We're going to test the WA macro,
but we want to now test it
by clicking in the map.
So we're going to
come to the circle,
which is a shape just
over the WA territory,
and shapes are brilliant.
You can hook your macro up
to any graphical object.
But shapes are very
versatile option.
So I'm going to
right-click on that shape.
I'm going to come
to Assign Macro.
I'm going to choose WA,
and then say "Okay".
Now let's repeat that for
the other two we've set up.
So I'm going to come
to New South Wales,
Assign Macro and ACT.
Now let's go and test them.
As I hover over the WA shape,
I get that little hand
icon and when I click
on it, that's worked
fantastically.
Same for New South
Wales and same for ACT.
So we've seen how using
a simple recorded macro,
we can add some fantastic
interactive features
to our visualizations
and our worksheets.
For your optional homework,
try finishing off
the rest macros and
hooking them all
up to the map so it works nicely.